Hi guys.
Welcome to building blocks.
And we're going to be talking about simple shapes initially and this is going to be work in a crack
open blender has start making some stuff as well.
So simple shapes that go together well.
Well they're all basically triangles right angle triangle as a square splits in two.
And that can also make a hexagon which is three general shapes basic geometric shapes that tests late
all the time perfectly.
So a right to hang this is just an example of size of course a right Hagel triangle whose sides are
one and one and the square root of two on the long side.
There we would go together perfectly with a square that's one by one and of course any other integer
rectangles that are one by one by two one by three whatever those will all go together well obviously
we don't want to smaller building blocks and we don't want two larger building blocks because that doesn't
give us much in the way of flexibility.
You can have an I sausalito triangle whose base is one and the sides are two in length which is very
useful for Roof components and things like that and equal lateral triangles of side length one as well.
These will all fit together really well and consistently.
Now those are very basic shape so what are the disadvantages.
None at this stage.
Later on it can feel and is restrictive.
That is where you want to be customizing and adding detail.
Not in the early stages we really want to be quick and effortless with our development at this stage.
We'll also be seeing that you can type formulas in the fields in blender which is incredibly powerful
and we can use this to solve otherwise complicated measurements in blender.
So let's go make some simple shapes and hop straight on over in a blender.
Okay so now we're back over in blender The first thing I'm going to do is show you the two things that
I've already created.
Now bear in mind I'm in my game.
Asit pack folder that I've carried under assets under meshes so I have gone ahead and created a mesh
object that's a square with the sizes and dimensions.
Here's two by two by 2.5 in the outliner.
And that matches the name of the file as well.
We've got the origin at the zero and it comes out by point to five in height.
Nice simple straightforward shape to make.
And of course we may come back and alter that later perhaps move the origin itself to a more appropriate
location if necessary or if we find we're need to import these more vertically than flat which may be
an option.
Then we can rotate it round and save it again.
The other one is simply this cut in half.
Let's go and open that now.
And that's the right haggle triangle and that is exactly the same as a square just chopped in half and
that will help us with any corner pieces or braces that we need to put together.
Perfect.
So let's go and hop over to something more exciting.
I'm going to open up a brand new blender file.
And let's go ahead and make the equal actual Triangle.
Now this is probably the first and only time I've use Pythagoras's since I've left school.
I knew there was a reason for it but no one really filled me in with the details.
So I'm going to add a mesh.
But this time I'm not going to add a plane or anything along these lines.
I'm going to have a single vertex.
Now if you can't see these options that I'm currently using that means you've not turned on something
in the user preferences an add ons.
Let's just have a look down here sorry.
Yes is ADD meche extra objects you need to make sure that is ticked.
And of course save your user settings as well.
The answer add meche extra objects.
Make sure there's a tick in that box.
Okay so I'm going to add a single vertex which is very powerful because I don't want to end up having
to delete lots of things.
There's loads of ways that you can make an equal actual trial.
Now I want it by two two and two so is equal actually.
All angles are equal or side length a quill as well.
Someone extrude this on the y axis in the positive direction by two and then it is going to line up
with our other models that we've made.
Now the question is here.
So let's spin this round of verticals going up.
So the question is here are how do I make these sides and angles right because unfortunately blender
can shape the angle that you've moved a line relative to another.
But it cannot give you accurate angles.
You can't say I want this at 60 degrees which would be equal to a triangle.
It would make it a lot easier but unfortunately you cannot do that.
So what we can do is select this edge and split it in two.
I won't be split it into two we're essentially making the equilateral triangle out of two right handed
triangles and I am going to have to scratch my head for a few moments whilst I figure out the maths
involved.
This bottom one if I remember correctly the two right angled sides are labelled A and B and then the
diagonal moving across is C and it's a squared plus B C squared equal C squared horray I remember.
So we need to find out this one here.
No we don't.
That's one.
So this was a Sorry this one's.
Here's going to be too.
So that's going to be two.
This one's going to be one so one square plus some think squared equals two squared.
And we can break that down we know that this is probably going to be four.
This half squared is going to be all point to five.
And there's an unknown here.
So all we can do here is go ahead and select the virtex that we've just created by subdividing which
is smack bang in the middle and extrude in the x direction by.
It doesn't matter because what we can then do is either in this vector area down here in the tool shelf
or indeed on the properties panel.
We've got an x coordinate for the vertex itself and that means we can type in a formula here which is
really really powerful.
Okay so let's go ahead and whatever we're going to have here is going to be the square roots of something
and the shortcut for the syntax what you need to type four square root is s q r t.
Square roots and then we need to open brackets and puts whatever we're square rooting in there.
So for instance if we put nine in there the answer will be three.
When we click on that again it doesn't keep the formula that is important.
It's not like excel where you calculate a formula and it keeps the formula in the background.
It just give you the results of that so Eskew Arti open brackets.
Okay so we're going to have Let's to see here there's this going to be four which is two squared which
will be this long narrow edge here's a square of four minus.
So in that square or four square root two which is four sorry the square of two was four.
Oh dear.
This is complicated.
And then finally this bottom bit which is one.
So for minus one was one squared is one.
Okay.
So that is the square root of three.
So let's go ahead and do that now.
One point seventy three.
Now what we should find now is that when we join here and here up there we go.
Fill that in and then do this one.
I'm going to remove this vertex in the middle and keep it as a one solid line.
Finally filling in the face and the other ones will point to five all.
So it makes sense here to go point to five.
And then of course we can name it appropriately has.
Well now it does look like here that I've gone the wrong way so just try extruding again.
Bye.
Just minus point two fivers have I made my I think.
Yeah.
Is flip around some is going to flip the Normal's there.
There we go.
And now when I extrude the z axis by point to five it should go in the.
Sorry z axis not x axis.
There we go.
It's gone up by the right amount.
Now of course have I named things appropriately it's just called verte at the moment.
That is no good.
So this is a it's an static mesh because it's not deforming in any way and doesn't have a skeleton associated
with it.
Ah what do we need to call this an e q.
Try and go.
And it's simply too.
I don't need to give any more information than that because it's going to be two by two by two.
They go to boy by two by four or five and then I'm just going to highlight that all and copy that so
I can actually save it and remember that we're going to save that in our directories So go ahead and
have that.
Yes.
There we go.
Excellent.
So we've got there that one all laid out here.
And of course it's time for you guys to have a challenge.
Okay I'd like you to make some basic building blocks.
So go ahead and make a nice sausages triangle with a base of two and sides of four blender units in
length.
You can use the technique that we've gone through or you could use any other technique that you so wish.
Make sure it has a thickness of nought point to five.
Now creates the plane and make it into a 3D object of point 2 5 in thickness and the right Hankel trying
always you should be able to derive from the the square that you've extruded out.
Make a basic ball with a doorway and window in it see a gun to take that basic plane that you've got
and starts modifying it slightly to create a doorway and a window.
Don't worry about anything fancy at this point.
Make the doorway a simple right rectangle cut out and the same with the window as well.
In fact you can make the window a smaller square in the middle.
I would recommend a size at the most we've got to buy to buy a nice size and you don't have to stick
to this recommendation is 3 in height by four in width by point to five in the depth itself and of course
if you make in different thickness walls then you wouldn't have to use pointy 5 at all.
If for the size in all of our wall sections at this particular point and remember to save each mesh
individually so pause a video now and give that a go.
Okay guys.
Welcome back.
Let's hop back over in a blender.
Okay so let's go ahead and start with this.
Now it is almost a isosceles triangle we just need to position these vertices in a certain place.
We know it's starting from zero.
So we can convert this once again in two to right hand triangles and work it out from there.
We need to know this height.
So it's going to be another square roots Eskew.
So the length along here of course is going to have a base of two.
But this is half of that so it's a one.
So it's going to be something else minus that one.
So let's have a look.
This edge here is going to be a four in length.
So let's pop the four in now.
That's it.
And it needs to be squared.
So this is going to be no.
15.
It's going to be square of 15 16 which is four squared minus one squared which is once the square roots
of 15.
There we go.
So that is going to give us.
And again I can do that here square roots 15 I could delete and extrude I'm not too fast.
But there we go there's ah isosceles triangle where we can make that very quickly and I'm pretty sure
that this length here we should verify that really.
So let's go down in the display options down here.
And at some point here we go air overlays mesh display edge info length.
So if we switch to link here and select that for we can see that the length is four that's quite hard
to see it's a small number on the screen.
But for so we know that that's worked perfectly.
So of course I'm going to guess that himesh I guess triangle or I s missed thing there are a strangle
two by four.
By not point two five.
That's fine I'm going to copy all of that and go ahead and save that as and paste that in a perfect
save.
Okay so the next thing I'm going to do is start with a two while.
Let's start with a different shape to play in this time your hunger to draw it with that Vertex of it's
get rid of him.
And these from our scene go ahead add a mesh.
Alan Skinner had a single vertex and that's going to sit at our origin which is fine.
I went to work in the positive direction so let's extrude this by four in this direction so four in
the wiser Why four.
Let's then extrude that up in the x-axis by three.
That gives us an opportunity of course to create a doorway in the middle and we can create various ways
of doing this in fact because we're working in whole blending units here.
I'm going to abort what I'm doing don't like what I'm doing anymore.
The change it's increments which we can see it's already turned onto and the snapping and just turn
on snapping.
Now what this means is it's going to move in increments which is really nice because I can go across
here extrude and go up by two in the x-axis.
There we go.
Make sure I am still there.
I'm going to view it from the top to prevent funny stuff from happening.
And Claire I'm going to have to make it on its side but that's fine.
I'm going to go to there and then back down.
And then I'm going to go across for the other four now.
Oh that's too far as.
One two three four.
So I should have stopped a bit further.
Oh dear.
So let's pull that back to there.
Perfect.
I don't know how well you can see my grid it's broken up into tenths of blender units at the moment
which is very useful for a placement of course.
Now I can go up by three cross down there and then back to the start point.
Now I'm probably going to have a double there because I didn't turn on Merge vs..
I'm going to highlight everything before I do anything else and hit space and I'm just going to type
in doubles here.
Robbie hit doubles over the side and there we go remove one vertex.
That's absolutely fine.
Now if I could just make this into one huge n gone at the moment that's not a problem at all.
Or I can make it into smaller ones so this edge on the top I could split up here and here.
I'm just going to fill it in for the moment and then extrude it up by points to five.
So there we go.
That is that one done.
Of course I can put this doorway in the centre if I wanted to but I'm going to leave it like that.
Finally I need to go ahead and name it and save it.
So I'm going to call this s m wall door.
So we know where it is and it is three by four by 2.5 of its height.
Oh oh.
Point two five not 2.5.
So that's height by width by depth.
Just to make sure you guys are following what I'm doing there.
So I'm going to copy that.
Go ahead to here and go in and save.
It's that save hurts.
So we've got we've built up a nice collection of building blocks here.
We're going to use them soon to build some stuff.
But let's start a new file and do a very similar thing.
I can modify that and I think that's going to be far too much to do compared to just adding a new vertex
and this time going through and making it ever so slightly different.
So again I'm going to go in a positive direction here.
And again the orientation might flip that one round later on I'm going to make this one in the way that
I can see here.
So let's turn snapping on incremental on and we want to zoom in just a little and make it four by three
so I'm going to go across by four up by 4 3 which is just there and then back across again before I
make that final one I'm going to merge vertices when they meet one another which is there.
I can just check up here vertices one of five Okay that's not a 3D object which is also good worthwhile
spinning around and checking that shouldn't happen when in orthographic projection but occasionally
does that seem sort of creative 5 for whatever reason so I again am going to remove doubles.
Now a couple of ways you can put a window in here.
I'm going to fill it in first of all when I could insets and have a window there that gives me some
control over what's going on so I can move it in by point one or move it in by a whole blender unit
that's absolutely fine.
I want a bit more control over its placement hand size etc..
So what I'm going to do here is actually subdivide it someone.
Subdivide.
Once that's not going to give us enough to subdivide it again and literally take out this middle area
here so of there.
There there there or indeed i could do any number of modifications here.
Okay.
Now once I've done that I'm going to hit the x key and delete the faces.
That's those gone.
And we select our entire model and I'm going to extrude it in the z axis by point to five.
That doesn't look like it's moved quite where I want to spin round and have looked.
Yes that's much better.
Now this is a wall.
So it's on its side.
So what we should do here is rotate it so whenever we import it we don't have to keep on rotating it.
We can probably do that with our door section as well.
I'm rapidly rapidly running at a time so I'm just going to rotate this one round.
I need to be an object married at this point.
There we go sir a take on the x axis and it looks like the normals are not quite right here.
I'm going to do that by 90 and I'm going to flip my Normal's hop into edit mode and flip them.
I had that dark blue thing going on.
So there we go we've got a war piece there we just need to do the same for the doors itself.
And there we go we've got some basic assets all made up and saved individually.
How did you guys get on.
Did you make a slightly different variants on these assets.
Please share in the discussions and I will see you in the next lecture.